## 10. LOGICLAB REFERENCE 

### 10.1 MENUS REFERENCE 

In the following tables you can see the list of all LogicLab’s commands. However, since 

LogicLab has a multi-document interface (MDI), you may find some disabled commands

or even some unavailable menus, depending on what kind of document is currently active.

#### 10.1.1 FILE MENU 

 Command  

 Icon Key  

 Description 

*New project* 

Creates a new LogicLab project.

*Open project* 

Opens an existing LogicLab project.

*Import project from* 

*target* 

Imports sources project from target device.

*View project (read* 

*only)* 

Opens an existing LogicLab project in read-only mode.

*Save project* 

Saves the current open project.

*Save project As* 

Saves the current open project specifying new name, location and 

extension.

*Close project* 

Closes the open project. 

*New text file* 

Opens a blank new generic text file.

*Open file* 

*Ctrl+O*

Opens an existing file, whatever its extension. The file is displayed

in the text editor. Anyway, if you open a project file, you actually

open the LogicLab project it refers to.

*Save* 

*Ctrl+S* Saves the document of the currently active window.

*Close* 

Closes the document of the currently active window.

*Options* 

Opens the LogicLab options dialog box.

*Print* 

*Ctrl+P* Prints the document of the currently active window.

*Print preview* 

Creates a preview of the document of the currently active window, 

ready to be printed.

*Print project* 

Prints all the documents making up the project.

*Printer setup* 

Opens the Printer setup dialog box.

*..recent..* 

Lists a set of project file recently opened.

*Exit* 

Closes LogicLab.

 10.1.2 EDIT MENU 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Undo* 

*Ctrl+Z* 

Cancels last action made in the document.

LogicLab user manual 

153 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Redo* 

*Ctrl+Y* 

Restores the last action cancelled by Undo.

*Cut* 

*Ctrl+X* 

Removes the selected items from the active document and 

stores them in a system buffer.

*Copy* 

*Ctrl+C* 

Copies the selected items to a system buffer.

*Paste* 

*Ctrl+V* 

Pastes in the active document the contents of the system buf

fer.

*Delete* 

*Del* 

Deletes the selected item.

*Delete line* 

*Ctrl+E* 

Deletes the whole source code line.

*Go to symbol* 

*Shift* 

*+F12* 

Allows you to move through the results of a symbol search

*Find in project* 

*Ctrl+*

*Shift+F* Opens the Find in project dialog box.

*Bookmarks...*

*Add/Toggle* 

*Ctrl+F2* Adds a bookmark to mark lines. If a bookmark is already 

defined, removes it.

*Next* 

*F2* 

Goes to next defined bookmark

*Prev* 

*Shift+F2* Goes to previous defined bookmark

*Remove all* 

Removes all defined bookmarks

*Go to line* 

*Ctrl+G* 

Allows you to quickly move to a specific line in the source

code editor.

*Find* 

*Ctrl+F*

Asks you to type a string and searches for its first instance

within the active document from the current location of the 

cursor.

*Find next* 

*F3* 

Iterates between the results of the research, found by the 

 Find  command.

*Replace* 

*Ctrl+H* 

Allows you to automatically replace one or all the instances of 

a string with another string.

*Insert/Move mode* 

*Spacebar*

Toggle between those two editing modes, used to insert or 

move blocks. You can switch from Insert/Move to Connection 

mode with the spacebar

*Connection mode* 

*Spacebar*

Editing mode which allows you to draw logical wires to con

nect pins. You can switch from Insert/Move to Connection 

mode with the spacebar

*Watch mode* 

Editing mode which allows you to add variables to any debug

ging tool.

*Zoom in*

*Ctrl +* 

*mouse* 

*wheel*

Increase zoom level inside the active POU.

*Zoom out*

*Ctrl +* 

*mouse* 

*wheel*

Decrease zoom level inside the active POU.

154 

LogicLab user manual 
#### 10.1.3 VIEW MENU 

 Command  

 Icon Key  

 Description 

*Toolbar*

*Main* 

Shows or hides the *Main* toolbar.

*Project* 

*Ctrl+J* Shows or hides the *Project* toolbar.

*Status bar* 

Shows or hides the *Status* bar.

*Debug* 

*Ctrl+B* Shows or hides the *Debug* toolbar.

*FBD bar* 

*Ctrl+D* Shows or hides the *FBD* toolbar.

*LD bar* 

*Ctrl+A* Shows or hides the *LD* toolbar.

*SFC bar* 

*Ctrl+Q* Shows or hides the *SFC* toolbar.

*Network* 

*Ctrl+N* Shows or hides the *Network* toolbar.

*Tool windows*

*Local variables* 

Shows or hides the local variables window for the active POU.

*Project* 

*Ctrl+W* Shows or hides the 

*Workspace* window (also called *Workspace*

window).

*Watch* 

*Ctrl+T* Shows or hides the *Watch* window.

*Properties window* 

Shows or hide the properties window.

*Oscilloscope* 

*Ctrl+K* Shows or hides the *Oscilloscope* window. 

*PLC run-time* 

*status* 

Shows or hides the *PLC run-time* window.

*Operators and* 

*blocks* 

*Ctrl+L* Shows or hides the Operators and Blocks window

*Library Tree* 

Shows or hides the *Libraries* window.

*Output* 

*Ctrl+R* Shows or hides the *Output* window.

*Cross Reference* 

Shows or hides the cross reference window.

*Resources* 

Add or remove the resources panel from the workspace.

*Catalog* 

Shows or hides the catalog window.

*Full screen* 

*Ctrl+U* Expands 

the currently 

active document window to fill entire

screen. (

 Esc  

to exit from this mode).

*Grid* 

Shows or hides a dotted grid in the background of graphical 

source code editors.

#### 10.1.4 PROJECT MENU 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*New object*

LogicLab user manual 

155 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*New program* 

Creates a new program. A dialog is prompted in order to 

specify the new program properties.

*New function* 

*block*

Creates a new function block. A dialog is prompted in order 

to specify the new function block properties.

*New function* 

Creates a new function block. A dialog is prompted in order 

to specify the new function properties.

*New variable*

*Automatic* 

Creates a new automatic variable. A dialog is prompted in 

order to specify the new variable properties.

*Mapped* 

*variable*

*Ctrl +* 

*Shift + M*

Creates a new mapped variable. A dialog is prompted in 

order to specify the new variable properties.

*Constant* 

Creates a new constant. A dialog is prompted in order to 

specify the new constant properties.

*Retain* 

Creates a new retain variable. A dialog is prompted in order 

to specify the new variable properties.

*New definition*

*Enumeration* 

Creates a new user defined type, of type enumeration.

*Interface* 

Creates a new user defined type, of type interface.

*Macro* 

Creates a new user defined type, of type macro.

*Structure* 

Creates a new user defined type, of type structure.

*Subrange* 

Creates a new user defined type, of type subrange.

*TypeDef* 

Creates a new user defined type, of type typedef.

*Copy object* 

Copies the object currently selected in the  Workspace .

*Paste object* 

Pastes the previously copied object.

*Duplicate object* 

Duplicates the object currently selected in the  Workspace , 

and asks you to type the name of the copy.

*Delete object* 

*Del* 

Deletes the currently selected object.

*View PLC object* 

*properties* 

*Alt+Enter* Shows properties and description of the currently selected 

object.

*Object browser* 

Opens the  Object  browser, which lets you navigate 

between objects.

*Compile* 

*F7* 

Launches the LogicLab compiler.

*Recompile all* 

*Ctrl+*

*Alt+F7* 

Recompiles the project.

*Generate* 

*redistributable* 

*source module*

Generates an RSM file.

*Import objects* 

Lets you import a LogicLab object from a library.

*Export object to* 

*library* 

Lets you export a LogicLab object to a library.

*Library manager* 

Opens the  Library  manager.

156 

LogicLab user manual Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Refresh all li*

*braries* 

Reloads all libraries linked to the project.

*Select target...* 

Lets you to select a new target for the project. 

*Refresh current* 

*target*

Lets you update the target file for the same version of the

target.

*Options...* 

Opens the project options dialog.

#### 10.1.5 ONLINE MENU 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Set up communica*

*tion...* 

Lets you set the properties of the connection to the target.

*Connect* 

LogicLab tries to establish a connection to the target.

*Download code* 

*F5*

LogicLab checks if any changes have been applied since last 

compilation, if so compiles the project and then downloads the 

source code to the target.

*Download options* 

Lets you set the properties of the source code downloaded to 

the target.

*Force target image* 

*upload* 

If the target device is connected, lets you upload the img file.

*Force debug symbols* 

*upload*

If the target device is connected, lets you upload the debug 

symbols file.

*Halt* 

Stops the PLC execution.

*Cold restart* 

Restarts the PLC execution and both retain and non-retain 

variables will be reset.

*Warm restart* 

Restarts the PLC execution and non-retain variables will be 

reset.

*Hot restart* 

Restarts the PLC execution without any reset on variables.

*Reboot target* 

Reboots the target.

*Read all logs again* 

Reloads all remote logs from target.

#### 10.1.6 DEBUG MENU 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Simulation mode* 

Open/close the integrated simulation environment.

*Start/Stop watch* 

*value*

Starts or stops (toggle) the evaluation of the symbols 

added in the watch window.

*Add symbol to watch* 

*F8* 

Adds a symbol to the  Watch  window.

LogicLab user manual 

157 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Add symbol to a de*

*bug window* 

*F10* 

Adds a symbol to a  debug  window.

*Insert new item* 

*into a debug window* 

*Shift+F10* Inserts a new item into a  debug  window.

*Quick watch symbol* 

*Shift+F8*

Opens a new window which allows you to se the current 

value of the selected symbol (not refreshing) and to force a 

new value.

*Live debug mode* 

If debug mode is running, starts or stops (toggle) the live 

debug mode.

*Add/remove text* 

*trigger* 

*F9* 

Adds/removes a text trigger.

*Add/remove* 

*graphic trigger* 

*Shift+F9* Adds/removes a graphic trigger.

*Remove all* 

*triggers*

*Ctrl+*

*Shift+F9* Removes all the active triggers.

*Trigger list* 

*Ctrl+I* 

Lists all the active triggers.

*Run* 

Restarts program after a breakpoint is hit.

*Step* 

Restarts program executing only one instruction, after a 

breakpoint is hit.

*Add/Remove* 

*breakpoint* 

*F12* 

Adds or removes a breakpoint.

*Remove all* 

*breakpoints* 

Removes all the active breakpoints.

*Breakpoint list* 

Lists all the active breakpoints.

#### 10.1.7 SCHEME MENU FOR FBD 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Network*

*New*

*Top* 

Adds a blank network at the top of the active document.

*Bottom* 

Adds a blank network at the bottom of the active document.

*Before* 

Adds a blank network before the selected network in the active 

document.

*After* 

Adds a blank network after the selected network in the active 

document.

*Label* 

Assigns a label to the selected network, so that it can be 

indicated as the target of a jump instruction.

*Object*

*New*

158 

LogicLab user manual Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Function* 

Opens the object browser in order to choose a function to be 

added to the current active document.

*Function* 

*block*

Opens the object browser in order to choose a function block to 

be added to the current active document.

*Variable* 

*shift+V* Opens the object browser in order to choose a variable to be 

added to the current active document.

*Constant* 

*shift+K* Opens the object browser in order to choose a constant to be 

added to the current active document.

*Return* 

*shift+R* Adds a return statement into the selected network.

*Jump to* 

*label* 

*shift+J* Adds a jump statement into the selected network.

*Operator* 

Opens the object browser in order to choose an operator to be 

added to the current active document.

*Comment* 

*shift+M* Adds a comment into the selected network.

*Instance name* 

Opens the object browser in order to choose an operator to be 

added to the current active document. 

*Open source*

Opens the editor by which the selected object was created, and 

displays the relevant source code:

\- if the object is a program, or a function, or a function block, 

this command opens its source code;

\- if the object is a variable or a parameter, this command opens 

the corresponding variable editor;

\- if the object is a standard function or an operator, this 

command has no functionality.

*Auto connect* 

Toggle auto-connection mode, in order to connect automatically 

two blocks when they are close enough.

*Delete invalid* 

*connection* 

*Ctrl+M* 

Removes all invalid connections, represented by a red line in the 

active scheme.

*Increment pins* 

*Ctrl+’+’* Adds additional pins to the selected block in order to increase 

standard ones.

*Decrement pins* 

*Ctrl+’-’* Removes pins added by the  Increment pins  command.

*Enable EN/ENO* 

*pins*

Adds the  enable in/enable out  pins to the selected block. 

The code implementing the selected block will be executed 

only when the  enable in  signal is true. The  enable out  signal 

simply repeats the value of  enable in , allowing you either to 

enable or to disable a set of blocks in cascade. 

*Object proper*

*ties* 

Shows some properties of the selected block.

LogicLab user manual 

159 
#### 10.1.8 SCHEME MENU FOR LD 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Network*

*New*

*Top* 

Adds a blank network at the top of the active 

document.

*Bottom* 

Adds a blank network at the bottom of the active 

document.

*Before* 

Adds a blank network before the selected network in 

the active document.

*After* 

Adds a blank network after the selected network in the 

active document.

*Label* 

Assigns a label to the selected network in order to be 

used as target of a jump instruction.

*Object*

*New*

*Parallel contact* 

*Shift+P* Adds a contact parallel to the selected one.

*Serie contact* 

*Shift+C* Adds a contact in series to the selected one.

*Coil* 

*Shift+O* Adds a Coil into the selected network.

*Block* 

*Shift+B* Opens the object browser in order to choose which 

block should be added to the current active document.

*Constant* 

*Shift+K* Opens the object browser in order to choose a constant 

to be added to the current active document.

*Return* 

*Shift+R* Adds a Return statement into the selected network.

*Jump* 

*Shift+J* Adds a jump statement into the selected network.

*Variable* 

*Shift+V* Opens the object browser in order to choose a variable 

to be added to the current active document.

*Expression* 

*Shift+E* Adds an expression into the selected network.

*New branch* 

Creates new branch after the current position.

*Comment* 

*Shift+M* Adds a comment into the selected network.

*Instance name* 

Lets you assign a name to an instance of the selected 

function block.

*Open source*

Opens the editor by which the selected object was 

created, and displays the relevant source code:

\- if the object is a program, or a function, or a function 

block, this command opens its source code;

\- if the object is a variable or a parameter, this 

command opens the corresponding variable editor;

\- if the object is a standard function or an operator, 

this command has no functionality.

160 

LogicLab user manual Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Open object* 

*O* 

Changes the selected object into an open contact 

object.

*Negated object* 

*C* 

Changes the selected object into a negated contact 

object.

*Positive object* 

*P* 

Changes the selected object into a positive contact 

object.

*Negative object* 

*N* 

Changes the selected object into a negative contact 

object.

*Set coil* 

*S* 

Changes the selected coil into a set coil.

*Reset coil* 

*R* 

Changes the selected coil into a reset coil.

*Increment pins* 

*Ctrl+’+’* Adds additional pins to the selected block in order to 

increase standard ones.

*Decrement pins* 

*Ctrl+’-’* Removes pins added by the 

 Increment pins 

command.

*Enable EN/ENO pins* 

*E*

Adds the  enable in/enable out  pins to the selected 

block. The code implementing the selected block will be 

executed only when the  enable in  signal is true. The 

 enable out  signal simply repeats the value of  enable  

 in , allowing you either to enable or to disable a set of 

blocks in cascade. 

*Set output line* 

Set selected pin as the output line of the block.

*Object properties* 

Shows some properties of the selected block.

#### 10.1.9 SCHEME SFC MENU 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Object*

*New*

*Step* 

Adds new step into the selected network.

*Transition* 

Adds new transition into the selected network.

*Jump* 

Adds new jump into the selected network.

*Modify*

*Add pin to divergent* 

*transition* 

Adds a divergent pin to the selected transition.

*Remove pin from divergent* 

*transition*

Removes a divergent pin to the selected 

transition.

*Add pin to convergent* 

*transition* 

Adds a convergent pin to the selected transition.

*Remove pin from convergent* 

*transition*

Removes a convergent pin to the selected 

transition.

LogicLab user manual 

161 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Add pin to simultaneous* 

*divergent transition*

Adds a simultaneous divergent pin to the 

selected transition.

*Remove pin from* 

*simultaneous divergent* 

*transition*

Removes a simultaneous divergent pin to the 

selected transition.

*Add pin to simultaneous* 

*convergent transition*

Adds a simultaneous convergent pin to the 

selected transition.

*Remove pin from* 

*simultaneous convergent* 

*transition*

Removes a simultaneous convergent pin to the 

selected transition.

*Add space before rightmost* 

*pin* 

Adds a space before the rightmost pin.

*Remove space before* 

*rightmost pin* 

Removes a space before the rightmost pin.

*Code Object*

*New Action* 

Adds an action in the active document.

*New Transition code* 

Adds a transition in the active document.

*Auto connect*

Toggle auto-connection mode, in order to 

connect automatically two blocks when they are 

close enough.

*Delete invalid connection* 

 Ctrl+M  Removes all invalid connections, represented by 

a red line in the active scheme.

#### 10.1.10  

 VARIABLES MENU 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Insert* 

*Ctrl+*

*Shift+ins* Adds a new row to the grid in the currently active editor.

*Delete* 

*Del* 

Deletes the variable in the selected row of the currently 

active table.

*Create multiple* 

Lets you to create a set of multiple variables.

#### 10.1.11  

 WINDOW MENU 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Cascade* 

Displaces all open documents in cascade, so that they 

completely overlap except for the caption.

*Tile*

The PLC editors area is split into frames having the same 

dimensions, depending on the number of currently open 

documents. Each frame is automatically assigned to one of 

such documents.

162 

LogicLab user manual Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Arrange Icons* 

Displaces the icons of the minimized documents in the bottom 

left-hand corner of the PLC editors area.

*Close all* 

Closes all open documents.

*Windows...* 

*Alt+W*

Shows the list of active open windows, allowing you to close or 

bring to focus specific window. Useful when you have a lot of

open window.

#### 10.1.12  

 TOOLS MENU 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Custom tools* 

Allows to see and execute previously loaded custom 

tools.

#### 10.1.13  

 HELP MENU 

 Command  

 Icon  

 Key  

 Description 

*Index* 

Lists all the  Help keywords  and opens the related topic.

*Context* 

*F1* 

Context-sensitive help. Opens the topic related to the currently 

active window.

*About...* 

Credits and version information.

### 10.2 TOOLBARS REFERENCE 

In the following tables you can see the list of all LogicLab’s toolbars. The buttons making 

up each toolbar are always the same, whatever the currently active document. However, 

some of them may produce no effect, if there is no logical relation to the active document.

#### 10.2.1 MAIN TOOLBAR 

#### 10.2.2 FBD TOOLBAR 

#### 10.2.3 LD TOOLBAR 

LogicLab user manual 

163 
#### 10.2.4 SFC TOOLBAR 

#### 10.2.5 PROJECT TOOLBAR 

#### 10.2.6 NETWORK TOOLBAR 

#### 10.2.7 DEBUG TOOLBAR 

164 

LogicLab user manual 
